Update the nightlies doc (#3213)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/core/nightlies.md

Here's how to find and use these versions.

## General information on nightlies

### Scala 3

Scala 3 nightly versions are published to [https://repo.scala-lang.org](https://repo.scala-lang.org). Historically, they used to be published to Maven Central. Old nightly versions of Scala 3 (all the way until `3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250822-658c8bd-NIGHTLY` in August 2025) are still available there, as well as via [https://repo.scala-lang.org](https://repo.scala-lang.org).

If you know the full version number of the nightly you want to use, you can use it just like any other Scala 3 version.

There are a number of ways to get that version number, as listed below.

### Scala 2

We informally refer to Scala 2 “nightly” versions, but technically it's a misnomer. A so-called “nightly” is built for every merged PR in the Scala 2 repo.

Scala 2 nightly versions are published to a special resolver. Unless you are using Scala CLI, you'll need to add that resolver to your build configuration in order to use these versions.

> The Scala 3 nightly repository now serves as a proxy to the said resolver, so it's also sufficient to use that instead.

Author: They used to be user facing, however - and the old resolver for Scala 2 used to be mentioned in this doc.
IMO hiding them in the new doc might lead to confusion.
I won't insist on keeping them, though.

> The Scala 3 nightly repository now serves as a proxy to the said resolver, so it's also sufficient to use that instead.

Reviewer: because the doc doesn't mention them anymore ,I would suggest to drop it. The doc now only contains reference to an unknown repository that host Scala 2 nightlies but you can always access it via repo.scala-lang.org. I think this is what will lead to confusion.

> The Scala 3 nightly repository now serves as a proxy to the said resolver, so it's also sufficient to use that instead.

Author: Okay then.
Should be fixed.

### Scala CLI

Scala CLI is the official runner of the language and has nightlies available without any extra configuration. From Scala 3.5.0 and on it's available under the `scala` command in Scala 3 installations. It can also be installed separately as `scala-cli`.

Note: The nightly repository is supported since Scala CLI v1.9.0 onwards (or `scala` installed with Scala 3.7.3 or newer).

You can run nightlies with commands such as:

    scala -e 'println("Hello") -S 3.nightly
    scala -e 'println("Hello") -S 3.3.nightly
    scala -e 'println("Hello") -S 2.13.nightly

>     scala -e 'println("Hello") -S 2.13.nightly # same as 2.13.nightly

Author: good catch, fixed

    //> using scala 3.nightly
    //> using scala 3.3.nightly
    //> using scala 2.nightly
    //> using scala 2.13.nightly
    //> using scala 2.12.nightly

See this [scala-cli doc page](https://scala-cli.virtuslab.org/docs/commands/compile#scala-nightlies) for details.

### Get it from the nightly website

A quick way to get that version number is to visit [https://nightly.scala-lang.org](https://nightly.scala-lang.org) and look in the upper left corner.

### Check the repository, directly

Another way is to scrape the repository, as shown in this script: [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc)

### SBT

To use recent nightlies with SBT, adding the appropriate resolver to the build configuration is necessary.

    ThisBuild / scalaVersion := "3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250916-eb1bb73-NIGHTLY"
    ThisBuild / resolvers += Resolver.scalaNightlyRepository
    lazy val root = (project in file("."))
      .settings(name := "sbt-with-scala-nightlies")

> Also note that SBT 1.11.5 or newer is necessary.

Author: it is though, earlier versions don't have the hardcoded resolver reference used in the example.

> Also note that SBT 1.11.5 or newer is necessary.

Reviewer: Fair enough, if it's about the resolver I agree.

## Scala 3

> Scala 3 nightly versions are published to [https://repo.scala-lang.org](https://repo.scala-lang.org). Historically, they used to be published to Maven Central. Old nightly versions of Scala 3 (all the way until `3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250822-658c8bd-NIGHTLY` in August 2025) are still available there. 

Reviewer: > Old nightly versions of Scala 3 (all the way until `3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250822-658c8bd-NIGHTLY` in August 2025) are still available there. 

And available via the repo too, it will proxy Maven Central. I used to have it working when it was a PoC under artifactory.remmal.io but when I reconfigured repo.scala-lang.org, I had authentication issues and disabled it for now (but the intention is to enable it back, so might worth a couple of sentences about it).

Reviewer: @Gedochao Fixed, and I also added the proxy to Scala 2 Nightlies, this way, we can say that **ALL** Scala Nightlies can be accessed via https://repo.scala-lang.org.

If you know the full version number of the nightly you want to use, you can use it just like any other Scala 3 version.

> One quick way to get that version number is to visit [https://dotty.epfl.ch](https://dotty.epfl.ch) and look in the upper left corner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One quick way to get that version number is to visit [https://nightly.scala-lang.org](https://nightly.scala-lang.org) and look in the upper left corner.
```

Note that it doesn't publish automatically yet there.

Author: it's outdated in both spots... okay

Reviewer: Lets fix that now too, PR incoming

Another way is to scrape the artifactory, as shown in this script: [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc)

> A third way is to use [scala-cli](https://scala-cli.virtuslab.org), as follows. 

Reviewer: I would bump this option higher in the list... `scala-cli` is the way to better use nightlies for testing and it shouldn't be after suggesting to have a scraping script.

Note 1: Since Scala 3.5.0, the `scala` command in a Scala installation runs `scala-cli`.

Note 2: The new artifactory is supported since Scala CLI v1.9.0 onwards (or `scala` installed with Scala 3.7.3 or newer).

### Scala CLI

You can run nightlies with commands such as:

    scala-cli -e 'println("Hello") -S 3.nightly
    scala-cli -e 'println("Hello") -S 3.3.nightly

The default command is `repl`, but all the other scala-cli subcommands such as `compile` and `run` work, too. It also works with `//>` directives in your script itself, for example:

    //> using scala 3.nightly

See this [scala-cli doc page](https://scala-cli.virtuslab.org/docs/commands/compile#scala-nightlies) for details.

> ### SBT

Reviewer: Can we give a full example of a `build.sbt` file?

Reviewer: Also, what about `mill`, can we add a section here about how to use nightlies in mill (cc @lihaoyi).

To use recent nightlies with SBT, adding the appropriate resolver to the build configuration is necessary.

    ThisBuild / scalaVersion := "3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250916-eb1bb73-NIGHTLY"
    ThisBuild / resolvers += Resolver.scalaNightlyRepository

> Note that for older nightlies (3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250822-658c8bd-NIGHTLY and before) no such change is necessary, as they were being published to Maven Central. 

Reviewer: No need to say such things, the proxy will fetch them and it's better to keep things simple by saying add the resolver and you have all the scala 3 nightlies available to you.

Author: I mean, for older nightlies they don't need to do that, right? just use SBT defaults.

### Scala CLI

Scala CLI is the official runner of the language and has nightlies available without any extra configuration. From Scala 3.5.0 and on it's available under the `scala` command in Scala 3 installations. It can also be installed separately as `scala-cli`.

Note: The new artifactory is supported since Scala CLI v1.9.0 onwards (or `scala` installed with Scala 3.7.3 or newer).

You can run nightlies with commands such as:

    scala -e 'println("Hello") -S 3.nightly
    scala -e 'println("Hello") -S 3.3.nightly

The default command is `repl` (unless sources are passed, in which case it switches to `run`), but all the other scala-cli subcommands such as `compile` and `run` work, too. It also works with `//> using` directives in your script itself, for example:

    //> using scala 3.nightly

See this [scala-cli doc page](https://scala-cli.virtuslab.org/docs/commands/compile#scala-nightlies) for details.

### Get it from the nightly website

A quick way to get that version number is to visit [https://nightly.scala-lang.org](https://nightly.scala-lang.org) and look in the upper left corner.

### Check the artifactory, directly

> Another way is to scrape the artifactory, as shown in this script: [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way is to scrape the repository, as shown in this script: [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/VirtusLab/community-build3/master/scripts/lastVersionNightly.sc)
```

> A third way is to use [scala-cli](https://scala-cli.virtuslab.org), as follows. 

Reviewer: outdated.

Author: fixed

      .settings(name := "sbt-with-scala3-nightlies")

Note that for older nightlies (3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250822-658c8bd-NIGHTLY and before) no such change is necessary, as they were being published to Maven Central. 

Also note that SBT 1.11.5 or newer is necessary.

### Mill

To use recent nightlies with Mill, a custom resolver for the initial bootstrap of the build is needed. 
Here's an example `build.mill` file:

    package build
    import mill.*
    import mill.api.*
    import scalalib.*

    def scala3NightlyRepo = "https://repo.scala-lang.org/artifactory/maven-nightlies"

    object project extends ScalaModule {
      def jvmWorker = ModuleRef(CustomJvmWorkerModule)
      override def scalaVersion = "3.8.0-RC1-bin-20250916-eb1bb73-NIGHTLY"
      override def repositories = Task { super.repositories() ++ Seq(scala3NightlyRepo)}
    }

    object CustomJvmWorkerModule extends JvmWorkerModule, CoursierModule {
      override def repositories = Task { super.repositories() ++ Seq(scala3NightlyRepo)}
    }

Note how the custom `JvmWorkerModule` is necessary with the added repository. It is not enough to just define it as a repository for the module dependencies.

> Also note that Mill 1.0.5 or newer is necessary for this.

Author: Mill 1.0.5 is freshly out, so that's solved.
https://github.com/com-lihaoyi/mill/releases/tag/1.0.5

> ## Scala 2.13 or 2.12

Reviewer: All of this section feels very redundant now. Can't we collapse Scala 3 and Scala 2 into one section?

Reviewer: I think we should.

Author: removed it, and merged information back with the Scala 3 stuff.
